This trip to the Turkish capital Ankara focused on the refugee crisis and the efforts to bring stability to Syria. 
Steinmeier talks to visa applicants at the German Embassy in Ankara 
No other country has taken in so many Syrian refugees over the past few years. 
So far more than two million people fleeing the civil war in Syria have come to Turkey. 
Thanks for Turkey’s engagement for refugees 
The laying down of arms has not really been secured yet; the conflict still has potential to escalate again in the form of military hostilities. 
What we therefore need now is implementation of the agreement on withdrawing weaponry from the front lines which was concluded at our Normandy Format meeting on 12 September. 
Find out more: 
Foreign Ministers meeting on the situation in eastern Ukraine 
Steinmeier also thanked Turkey for its support and declared: 
Steinmeier took the time to listen to the staff in the visa section. 
After his conversations he expressed his thanks for the great dedication they had shown in handling the large increase in visa applications in recent months. 
Steinmeier with opposition leader Kılıçdaroğlu 
The reason for this is also the conflict in Syria. 
Due to its geographical location, the embassy in Ankara is an important point of contact for Syrian refugees wishing to travel to Germany legally. 
Intensive consultations in Ankara 
The refugee flows were also the focal point of Steinmeier’s talks with Turkish politicians. 
The German Foreign Minister continued, “We in Germany now have some inkling of what that means.” 
The efforts to stabilise Syria were another important subject of the talks. 
Steinmeier also took the opportunity to discuss with his interlocutors how Germany could provide even more support. 
On the day before his visit, Steinmeier pointed out that Germany and Europe were already cooperating closely with Ankara. 
He conceded that the political situation within Turkey was “not straightforward” at present due to the forthcoming elections. 
For Steinmeier went on to say, 
After visiting the centre, Steinmeier urgently called for greater support for transit and host countries. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in eastern Ukraine 
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement on the situation in eastern Ukraine this morning (21 September) while in Bangladesh on an official visit: 
I appeal urgently to Kyiv and Moscow not to put the ceasefire in eastern Ukraine back in jeopardy at this critical time. 
The German Embassy in Beirut and the Consulate-General in Istanbul are facing similar challenges. 
Their talks focused on the situation in Syria and refugee policy. 
putting an end to the killing 
Both Ministers highlighted the need to improve the humanitarian situation of Syrian refugees in the region. 
Prior to their consultations, Steinmeier and Kerry had met Syrian refugees who have found refuge in Germany. 
Close coordination 
Steinmeier and Kerry in consultations in Berlin 
More information on refugee policy 
More information on the conflict in Syria 
More information on the fight against the terrorist organisation ISIS 
On Friday Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Ankara for political talks on the refugee crisis and the conflict in Syria. 
On Friday (18 September) Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Turkey for a short visit. 
When Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrived in Ankara on Friday morning, he was well aware that 
Turkey is a key country with regard to the conflict in Syria. 
Furthermore, as a neighbouring country and an influential regional power, Turkey has an important role to play in resolving the Syrian conflict. 
Steinmeier’s goal was also to gain a first-hand impression of the situation of the refugees in Turkey during his trip. 
Directly after his arrival in Ankara the German Foreign Minister's first stop was therefore a registration centre for refugees. 
At the registration centre Steinmeier spoke to a few of the people waiting, who had fled to Turkey from Syria, Iraq or Afghanistan. 
I think too often we in Europe underestimate what Syria’s and Iraq’s neighbours have coped with in recent years, and that applies particularly to Turkey. 
The travel itinerary also included a visit to the German Embassy, where Steinmeier spoke to visa applicants wanting to join relatives in Germany for the purposes of family reunification. 
Speaking after a meeting with his new Turkish counterpart Feridun Hadi Sinirlioğlu, Steinmeier said that he had “the greatest respect” for the way in which Turkey was working to accommodate and care for the more than two million Syrian refugees in the country. 
The refugee flows in the region also played a central role in Steinmeier’s consultations with President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu. 
Here, as in the talks with opposition leader Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu and Selahattin Demirtaş, co-chairman of the HDP opposition party, which is particularly strong in south-eastern Turkey, a further issue was the “not straightforward” domestic situation in Turkey in the run-up to the parliamentary elections. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier speaking with Turkish President Erdoğan 
In Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s view, it is only by working together that Germany and Turkey will succeed in finding “sensible, humane and truly workable solutions” to the major challenges they face in this area. 
Nevertheless he advocated “cooperating yet more in a spirit of partnership” with the country. 
“Turkey is a key country with regard to managing the massive refugee crisis and with regard to our political efforts to bring the horrendous civil war in Syria to an end.” 
Steinmeier and Kerry for a new initiative to end the civil war in‪ Syria 
On Sunday, Foreign Minister Steinmeier received his US counterpart John Kerry in Berlin. 
On Sunday (20 September), Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier received his US counterpart John Kerry in Berlin. 
Joint press conference with Kerry (left) and Steinmeier (right) 
Putting an end to the killing in Syria was a “political and moral duty”, said Foreign Minister Steinmeier following the consultations with his US counterpart in Berlin. 
According to Steinmeier, they agreed that now the only way to stop the civil war in Syria was to launch a new political and diplomatic initiative “as soon as possible”. 
Syria – 
However, this could only be successful if “all-too narrowly defined national interests” were set aside and the international community adopted a joint stance together with Turkey as well as Saudi Arabia, Iran and Russia. 
In this regard, Steinmeier welcomed the talks on Syria between the US and Russia which began recently. 
After the meeting, Kerry announced that the US would take in more refugees from Syria in the future. 
At the press conference, the US Secretary of State also stressed that in the refugee crisis Germany was an “example to the world”. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier thanked his American colleague for the close coordination and cooperation on foreign policy matters to date. 
In connection with this, he recalled the joint negotiations within the framework of the E3+3 group which led to an agreement on Iran’s nuclear programme. 
For his part, US Foreign Minister Kerry paid tribute to the close partnership and friendship between Germany and the United States. 
Kerry’s visit to Berlin was part of the ongoing close coordination between Germany and the US on foreign policy questions. 
US Country Profile 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the adoption of a new constitution in Nepal 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement on 21 September in response to a new constitution being adopted in Nepal: 
I welcome the Nepal Constituent Assembly’s adoption of the new constitution. 
This is a significant step on the way to reconciliation and increased democracy. 
The fact remains that 
Democracy-building aid and election observation 
Democratic structures increase stability, because they promote responsible governance and a peaceful balance of interests. 
Election observation requires that the technical and legal prerequisites for the conduct of democratic elections are in principle fulfilled (independent electoral commission, democratic electoral law, participation of the opposition in the election, freedom of expression and access to the media for all political parties). 
Mr Mayor, 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
This year’s Emperor Otto Prize is being awarded to an important European institution, 
It was then, in the summer of 1975, that the states participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) signed the Helsinki Final Act. 
It was here, Mr Quast, in the years of peaceful revolution, that you gave encouragement and called for calm and dialogue. 
Nepal is embarking on a new chapter in its history; it is now a country built on democracy. 
It has laid the foundations of due process and democracy on which to build a positive economic and political future. 
This is also an important signal for the people whose country was devastated by a catastrophic earthquake a few months ago. 
The Helsinki Final Act is thus not, as its name suggests, a final step. 
We are glad that Germany was able to advise the Nepalese Government during the process of shaping its constitution. 
Germany is and will remain a partner to Nepal. 
On the contrary, after the end of the East-West confrontation, it became the foundation on which today’s OSCE was established and which underpins that Organization to this very day. 
We will continue to support the country in its economic development. 
Three – 
The three pillars of the OSCE are 
I hope that the violent unrest which flared up especially in the Terai in recent weeks can be laid to rest by dialogue between the demonstrators and the Government and that the inclusion of all parts of the population can be taken forward. 
– politico-military security, 
– cooperation in economic and environmental matters, and 
We expect the Nepalese Government will channel all its efforts into speeding up the reconstruction of public institutions and residential buildings which were destroyed by the earthquake. 
– the protection of human rights and basic freedoms. 
In total, more than 90 million euros in public money and private donations have so far been sent from Germany to fund reconstruction. 
On this front too, Nepal can rely on our ongoing support. 
After a difficult process which took seven years, Nepalese President Ram Baran Yadav announced the adoption of a new Nepalese constitution today. 
In 308 articles, the constitution stipulates how the state is structured, its federal organisation and its secular nature as well as arranging matters of citizenship, fundamental rights and jurisdiction. 
Germany assisted the drafting process by providing internationally recognised independent experts. 
These include the principle of the inviolability of frontiers, territorial integrity and the peaceful settlement of disputes between states, as well as non-intervention in internal affairs and respect for human rights. 
That is no easy task! 
I do not care to imagine where we would be if the OSCE and its courageous staff were not keeping an eye on this conflict. 
The OSCE edifice will never be completed. 
It is a constant work-in-progress, adapting to the times and the challenges they bring. 
Some of them had not even officially entered into effect. 
Let me give just one example. 
Tens of thousands of refugees were able to return to their homes. 
in Vienna, Warsaw, or Donetsk. 
The Emperor Otto Prize is for you, my ladies and gentlemen. 
Steinmeier and Fabius in Bangladesh – 
You have stood at the helm of the OSCE during the tempest and have kept it on course. 
The present crisis has left cracks in the foundations of Europe’s security architecture. 
The effects of climate change pose a particular threat to Bangladesh as it is densely populated and broad swathes of the country lie at sea level. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and French Foreign Minister Fabius are welcomed at Dhaka airport by their counterpart 
Inclement weather prevents a planned visit to a shelter 
Bangladesh is one of countries in the world particularly affected by climate change. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier warned that 
if the sea level were to rise by even one metre, a fifth of Bangladesh would be under water. 
Thus, a rise in the sea level would force millions of people to flee. 
The country is already suffering from the consequences of global warming, for instance severe storms, floods and saline soil. 
The German and French Foreign Ministers had therefore specifically chosen Bangladesh for their visit in order to gain an insight into the effects of climate change, 
That is another reason why Steinmeier believes that the industrialised countries have a particular responsibility within the climate negotiations. 
According to the German Foreign Minister, an agreement would have to be legally binding and backed by sufficient funding in order to be successful. 
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier together with Bangladeshi Foreign Minister Abul Hassan Mahmood Ali at the Bangshi River 
Positive sign from the business sector 
Here, too, the spotlight was on climate change. 
A further focus was the country’s political, economic and social development. 
Furthermore, Bangladesh pledged to support the preparation of a special conference on the topic of climate and security which Germany will host at the end of September on the margins of the UN General Assembly in New York. 
Steinmeier warned that the next generation of conflicts would likely be over water and other natural resources. 
held because Germany and France are about to move into a shared Embassy building in the capital, Dhaka. 
At the end of the day, everyone knew that joint construction plans could put relationships to the test, even within a family, he said. 
“At least between Germany and France, the climate could hardly be better!” 
The OSCE’s partnerships in Asia and the Mediterranean illustrate this nicely. 
But it has also shown that the principles of construction applied in Helsinki and the Charter of Paris were and remain the right ones. 
And this is of tremendous importance in particular in view of the current refugee crisis. 
I thank you, Ms Junkermann and Mr Quast, for making us feel welcome in this beautiful house of God. 
Even if the events in Ukraine are doing their best to shake it, 
Speech by Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at the presentation of the Emperor Otto Prize to the OSCE in Magdeburg Cathedral 
this beautiful cathedral has close links with the history and values of the OSCE. 
Just two weeks later, doctor Karl-Heinz Nitschke from Riesa near Dresden was the first GDR citizen to cite this Final Act, in which all signatories had affirmed the principle of freedom of travel, in his application to leave East Germany. His application was, of course, rejected. 
Thousands of people from across the GDR sought to assert the rights guaranteed them by the Helsinki Document. 
In Magdeburg, this cathedral became a focal point for gatherings and protest. 
It was from here that the events of 1989 played out in Magdeburg, bringing political change that also owed something to the Helsinki Process. 
that would have been too much of an engineering feat for any Gothic master builder! 
These multiple extensions have resulted in a complex and even somewhat mystifying edifice. 
The current crises tragically show that the key Helsinki tenets are today just as topical as ever. 
The crisis in Eastern Ukraine has made this all too clear. 
The OSCE was quick to establish a substantial monitoring mission in Ukraine. 
For the past year, OSCE monitors have been verifying the ceasefire negotiated in Minsk. 
But you don’t need me to tell you that. 
Making progress is hard work. 
We have to fight against repeated setbacks. 
But one thing is for sure: 
It was forced to demonstrate this ability already in the early 1990s, shortly after its members had ushered in a “new era of democracy, peace and unity” with the Charter of Paris. 
That vision was to be shattered by the wars in Yugoslavia. 
And even then – when it was still the CSCE – the organization resolutely rose to the challenge. 
And it proved to be a master of improvisation! 
These first monitoring missions were based on procedures that had only been invented a few months earlier. 
Since then, the OSCE has been active in numerous crises – in the Republic of Moldova, in the Southern Caucasus, in Central Asia and now in Ukraine. 
It is the OSCE’s fate that its successes often go unseen. 
May I take you back to the year 2010, to the change of leadership in Kyrgyzstan and the massive ethnic clashes that took place. 
Back then, stability was quickly restored by the OSCE working together with the United Nations and the EU. 
A political reconciliation process could begin. 
Two years ago another great champion of reconciliation and of Europe was presented with the Emperor Otto Prize here in this cathedral. 
I am speaking of Egon Bahr, whose funeral I attended a few days ago. 
Bahr once stated that his policies were based on the core axiom that “people have to come first” and that “every conceivable and responsible attempt” must be made to improve their lives and their prospects for the future. 
be it as advisers, monitors or mediators, 
This Prize also honours the work of the Swiss OSCE Chairmanship over the past year – and thus particularly your efforts, Didier Burkhalter – and those of the present Serbian Chairmanship, led by you, Ivica Dačić. 
You deserve great thanks for this, for your actions have strengthened the OSCE. 
The edifice is structurally sound! 
A reason for optimism, in my view, is the interest expressed by states from outside the OSCE area, who want to learn more about our experiences of the past decades. 
Most refugees are fleeing political conflicts which also need political solutions. 
These are needed so that the refugees can do what most of them so yearn to – to return to their homes and live there in security and with hope for the future. 
In a month’s time we will, in our capacity as OSCE participating States, meet with our Mediterranean partners in Amman. 
I am certain that the OSCE is built on just as strong a foundation. 
We want to use our Chairmanship next year to this end. 
so that many more generations can live in Europe under the protective roof provided by joint security, cooperation and understanding. 
We don’t need a new building. What we need are concerted efforts to repair the cracks that have appeared, 
Over the years since 1989, the OSCE has, to continue with the architectural metaphor, been equipped with new buttresses and pillars: the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights was added, as were the Representative on Freedom of the Media, the High Commissioner on National Minorities and the field missions on the ground. 
Franco-German signal for climate protection 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited Bangladesh, a country particularly affected by the effects of climate change, together with his French counterpart Fabius on Monday (21 September). 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited Bangladesh with his French counterpart Laurent Fabius on Monday (21 September). 
Both Ministers called for an agreement at the world climate summit in Paris in December and for progress in global efforts to combat climate change. 
The country is less than half the size of Germany, yet has approximately twice the number of inhabitants. 
something which they did in a more direct manner than expected – a planned visit to a shelter for tropical storms, constructed with support from Germany, had to be cancelled due to heavy rainfall. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier noted that Bangladesh only contributes 0.15 percent to global greenhouse gas emissions, yet “faces grinding poverty and has suffered more than nearly any other country from the effects of climate change.” 
During their visit, the two Foreign Ministers also held political talks with their colleague Abul Hassan Mahmood Ali and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. 
Following the talks, the German Foreign Minister spoke about the positive development in the economy, 
stating that in recent years, Bangladesh had enjoyed stable growth of around 6 percent and had increased the volume of its trade with Germany to some 4.5 billion euros. 
Even the often-criticised working conditions in the textile industry were slowly improving and more inspections were being carried out. 
Steinmeier between his counterparts from France and Bangladesh at the topping-out ceremony for the joint Franco-German Embassy building in Dhaka 
Topping-out ceremony, a symbol of Franco-German friendship 
At the end of their visit, Steinmeier and Fabius attended a topping-out ceremony symbolic of the Franco-German friendship, 
For Steinmeier, the project is the result of extraordinarily good Franco-German cooperation. 
Yet in light of this successful project he confirmed that, 
Up-to-date Bangladesh Country Profile 
And I am particularly pleased that we have been permitted to hold this award ceremony here in the cathedral in Magdeburg, 
for – as many of you are perhaps unaware – 
Let’s step back 40 years. 
But it was the first application of many. 
It underscores just how much we need the OSCE today! 
You know that Magdeburg Cathedral, too, was worked on for more than 150 years ... It is in this metamorphosis that the OSCE’s strength lies, in this flexibility to adapt whilst adhering to basic principles. 
Since its inception, the OSCE has improved the lives of many people – by preserving their security and their rights, as well as by promoting good governance. 
Its success is due to the countless men and women who have worked for the Organization over the past decades, 
And I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for your dedication. 
One of the issues we should discuss whilst there is which instruments of dialogue, understanding and confidence-building could we use jointly to lay the groundwork for solutions to the conflicts in the region. 
Magdeburg Cathedral stands testimony to the durability of stable foundations and solid pillars. 
we should keep up our work on the OSCE’s pillars and capabilities. 
the OSCE, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. 
But the Organization remains firmly rooted in the Helsinki principles. 
Its appearance is perhaps now more reminiscent of the Rococo style than of the simple lines of Gothic architecture ... 
Just like this cathedral, the OSCE is built on strong pillars. 
But unlike this cathedral, the OSCE has only three main pillars. 
Following decades of civil war, the country has recently made significant progress as regards reconciliation and democratic development. 
A new era 
This was Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first visit to Sri Lanka. 
The island state off the east coast of India suffered decades of civil war, which has left its marks on the country to this day. 
However, there have recently been positive developments. 
A visit at a time of reconciliation 
Following his meeting with Foreign Minister Mangala Samaraweera, Steinmeier said: 
“We are willing to accept international help,” he said. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with students from the Sri Lanka German Training Institute 
In his speech to the students, Steinmeier emphasised the importance of this project. 
I firmly believe 
It will help you to create a better future for your country. 
that you will have the opportunity to achieve even more in this institute. 
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier at Kilinochchi vocational training centre 
During his visit, Foreign Minister Steinmeier also travelled to Kilinochchi in the Tamil region in northern Sri Lanka, where a vocational training centre is currently being set up with German support. 
Sri Lanka country profile 
Six years after the end of the civil war, democratic elections at the start of 2015 resulted in a peaceful handover of power. 
The reconciliation process between the parties to the civil war – the Sinhalese and the Tamils – was the main topic on the agenda of Steinmeier’s visit. 
Germany’s Foreign Minister held talks with President Maithripala Sirisena and Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe, as well as with Tamil opposition leader Rajavarothiam Sampanthan. 
Giving young people prospects for the future 
This is the reason why Germany is supporting Sri Lanka in the field of vocational training. 
Speaking at the inauguration of the centre, Steinmeier underlined that the opening of a vocational training centre in Kilinochchi was also a “sign of hope” after a long and bitter civil war. 
Sri Lanka is currently experiencing a time of renewal. 
During his visit, Steinmeier offered Sri Lanka Germany’s support in the reconciliation process. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier commended this transfer of power, describing 
its “peaceful nature” as “exemplary in the region”. 
Foreign Minister Samaraweera thanked Steinmeier for his offer of support. 
but Germany would be happy to share its experiences with Sri Lanka, if the country so wishes. 
“There is no one global model for reconciliation processes, 
Elements of reconciliation include seeking the truth, justice, compensation and, of course, the guarantee that the past will not be repeated.” 
Steinmeier said that giving young people prospects for the future was the most effective way to foster reconciliation and reconstruction. 
This is where you will lay the foundations for your career and your future. 
During his visit, he offered Sri Lanka Germany’s support in the reconciliation process. 
Supporting the reconciliation process – Steinmeier visits Sri Lanka 
We are not merely building a Sri Lankan-German vocational training centre here. 
She regards world heritage as an integral part of our history, our identity and our future. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited Sri Lanka on Tuesday (22 September). 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier was welcomed by his Sri Lankan counterpart, Mangala Samaraweera, on his arrival in Colombo 
Provincial capital Kilinochchi was hit particularly hard by the brutal civil war in Sri Lanka, which lasted over 25 years and only ended in 2009. 
Minister of State Böhmer on the appointment of Mechtild Rössler as Director of the UNESCO World Heritage Centre in Paris 
Maria Böhmer, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, issued the following statement today (23 September) on the appointment of Mechtild Rössler as Director of the UNESCO World Heritage Centre in Paris: 
I offer Mechtild Rössler my heartfelt congratulations on her appointment as Director of the UNESCO World Heritage Centre in Paris and thank her predecessor Kishore Rao for his commitment over many years. 
In Mechtild Rössler, the UNESCO World Heritage Centre will have a leader who is a renowned expert in her field and has worked for the protection of world natural and cultural heritage for 20 years. 
I realised that we share this view most recently during the 39th session of the UNESCO World Heritage Committee in Bonn. 
Together with Kishore Rao, she actively supported me in my role as President of the UNESCO World Heritage Committee. 
The appointment of Mechtild Rössler is also a sign of appreciation for Germany’s contribution to the international protection of world heritage and cultural property. 
Foreign Minister video Sri Lanka 
It’s a very emotional moment for Iqbal Anver. 
He came to Leipzig in 1971. 
Today, he is returning to his old home, Sri Lanka. 
As a doctor in Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s delegation. 
At first glance you see a tropical paradise. 
The welcome for the German Foreign Minister is all the warmer. 
There are hopes of support for reconciliation and reconstruction. 
This is why the Minister is making a special trip to the northern, Tamil, part of the island. 
School buildings now stand where the civil war once raged. 
Built with support from Germany. 
(O-Ton Steinmeier) “For, naturally, we have thought about 
how we can provide help from outside. 
What can Germany contribute? 
Could German assistance here take the form of building a large vocational training centre? 
Because if the country is to be reconstructed then it will need skilled people.” 
We are seeing some tender shoots of reconciliation in Sri Lanka but they still need a lot of nurturing. 
The hope, though, can be felt everywhere. 
Including in our delegation doctor, Iqbal Anver. 
“The developments, as I’m seeing them here, in my home, are very positive, and they have been very positively received by the delegation and the participants. I’m pleased to see them! 
I’m moved...or rather enthused! 
I feel great!” 
Yet if you scratch the surface, the wounds of a decades-long civil war start to show. 
And now, I’m accompanying the Foreign Minister to my old home as a doctor, for me that is a great honour. 
Great respect for Portuguese reform efforts 
Portuguese Foreign Minister Rui Machete came to Berlin for talks with Frank-Walter Steinmeier. 
The Ministers discussed Europe’s refugee policy. 
Praise for Portugal’s reform policy 
Frank-Walter Steinmeier and the Portuguese Foreign Minister Rui Machete 
Portugal had worked courageously and resolutely to keep moving forward and had launched a process of reform which demonstrated how economic difficulties could be overcome. 
Machete thanked Germany for its support during the debt crisis and paid tribute to the good quality of the countries’ bilateral relations as well as the importance of Germany’s economic engagement in Portugal. 
The prospects of joint German-Portuguese investments in Angola were also discussed – they could make a contribution to diversifying Angola’s economy. 
Frank-Walter Steinmeier most recently visited Portugal in May this year, when amongst other things he took part in the third German-Portuguese Forum. 
Topic of European refugee policy 
Steinmeier welcomed this decision. 
Steinmeier said that it was crucial to mitigate the causes of violence, war and civil war and if possible to help bring about a political solution. 
Signs of hope in Iran and Libya 
Steinmeier also expressed his hope that the understanding between the negotiating partners in Libya on a government of national unity would lead to said understanding being supported by the two parliaments in Libya, too. 
For a new diplomatic initiative in Syria 
Steinmeier went on to say that the agreement with Iran and understanding in Libya would improve the prospects of launching a new initiative to de-escalate the Syrian conflict. 
To date, however, the partners important to doing so had not yet sat around one table. 
To achieve a lasting de-escalation of the conflict and to shift the focus onto the most important enemy in the region – the terrorist organisation ISIS – even further efforts were needed to bring the extremely divergent positions of the individual regional actors closer together. 
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier expressed his respect for Portugal’s reform policy aimed at overcoming its debt crisis, saying that 
An important topic at the talks between the two Foreign Ministers was migration and Europe’s refugee policy with the decision made by the European Justice and Home Affairs Ministers yesterday on the distribution of 120,000 refugees. 
He said that the example of Iran went to show that with patience, perseverance and determination it could be possible to prevent the military escalation of conflicts. 
Steinmeier welcomed the fact that the United States and Russia were talking to one another about this matter. 
The German Foreign Minister announced that the attempts to resolve the Syria conflict would play an important role in the opening week of the 70th General Assembly in New York, too. 
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier summed up the outcome of today’s meeting of the Foreign Ministers of France, Russia and Ukraine – Laurent Fabius, Sergey Lavrov and Pavlo Klimkin – as well as of Germany, at Villa Borsig in Berlin on the evening of 12 September 2015 as follows: 
“We have now met in the Normandy Format seven times, five of them here in Berlin. 
In all of these meetings there has been heated discussion, and this time it was no different. 
However, today’s consultations also showed, even now, how arduous and difficult it is to make any headway and that any progress made can be jeopardised time and again. 
What we achieved today was hard work, and will remain so, and this will now have to be implemented by the Contact Group. 
What have we agreed on? 
I Security 
We jointly reaffirmed that the ceasefire which has held for two weeks now must be further stabilised and secured. 
We will achieve that with our firm commitment to the agreement on the withdrawal of weapons from the conflict zone. 
Agreements between Kyiv and Moscow under OSCE mediation will be concluded shortly. 
Our message to the Trilateral Contact Group’s working group on security is therefore that the agreement on the withdrawal of lighter weapons and armoured vehicles must be finalised and implemented as quickly as possible. 
The positions of the two sides are not far apart. 
The working group should aim to reach an agreement at its next meeting. 
Furthermore, it was agreed that no more mines should be laid and that efforts to clear mines should be undertaken. 
The assurance that the OSCE will have free and unhindered access to the entire conflict zone will help ensure that. 
We also made considerable progress today in key issues in the political process.Finally, I would say, for this is key to the implementation of the Minsk agreements. 
The modalities and the timetable for the local elections will be worked out in the Trilateral Contact Group’s working group on political affairs. 
It will focus on the proposals put forward by Pierre Morel, the coordinator of this working group, and the Minsk Protocol. 
All other remaining contentious and difficult issues concerning the election process, status issues and constitutional reform should now be discussed quickly in the Contact Group’s working group on political affairs. 
The proposals on this are on the table and, in our view, provide a good basis for the upcoming decisions. 
We have to start thinking about the coming winter. 
We do not want to see a repeat of last winter’s humanitarian emergency. 
There was therefore broad agreement that concrete further steps would not only be useful but are absolutely necessary. 
We will therefore ensure that humanitarian relief organisations are granted full access to people in the conflict areas. 
The remaining time should also be used to launch the projects we proposed on reconstruction and the restoration of economic ties as soon as possible. 
Particularly with regard to the water supply, much remains to be done. 
We all want to see this addressed promptly. 
It should now be possible to open further access points. 
Today’s meeting as well as the meeting of Heads of State and Chancellor Merkel scheduled to take place in Paris at the start of October show – despite all the difficulties – that this will is still there. 
We must and can build on that now.” 
But at least I can say with some relief that today’s meeting was one of the less confrontational and more successful. 
II Political process 
III Humanitarian and economic issues 
It remains the case that the Minsk process will stand or fall with the political will of the parties to the conflict to honour the agreements reached in Minsk in February. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier comments on the breakthrough in the Colombian peace talks 
Further difficult compromises will be needed to bring this long-standing internal conflict in Colombia to an end. 
We also appreciate the efforts of those countries which have supported the negotiations in Havana over the past three years, in particular Norway and Cuba, as well as Venezuela and Chile, which have played and continue to play an important role in this process. 
All those involved in the peace process may rest assured of Germany’s support in implementing the peace accords now emerging, especially with regard to the key task of transitional justice. 
I welcome the fact that the Colombian Government and the FARC negotiators have managed to remove the worst obstacles to an agreement. 
This political breakthrough was possible thanks to the courage displayed by all those involved, above all the Colombian Government under President Santos. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (24 September) on the breakthrough achieved in the negotiations between the Colombian Government and FARC guerillas in Havana: 
Statement by Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the tragic accident in Mecca 
I am shocked by the news that several hundred people have been killed during this year’s Hajj. 
I would like to express my heartfelt sympathy to the Saudi Arabian people, to all pilgrims who have travelled to Mecca, and in particular to the families of the victims who have been dealt such a cruel blow today, during the most important Muslim holiday. 
Divergent interests may no longer stand in the way of joint action on the part of the international community. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (24 September) on the mass panic during the Islamic Hajj pilgrimage near Mecca that has claimed the lives of hundreds of people: 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier prior to his trip to Paris for talks on Syria 
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement today (24 September) prior to his trip to Paris for a meeting with French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius, British Foreign Secretary Phillip Hammond and EU High Representative Federica Mogherini: 
I am travelling to Paris today to discuss possible ways out of the crisis in Syria together with the French Foreign Minister, British Foreign Secretary and the EU High Representative. 
After five years of civil war, 250,000 dead and 12 million refugees, we must now take decisive steps towards de-escalating this conflict. 
UN Special Envoy Staffan De Mistura has worked tirelessly on the preparations for this in recent weeks. 
All of the attempts made so far have failed owing to the irreconcilable positions of actors in the region and the stance adopted by the Syrian regime. 
The aim now is to seek out ways to move towards a political process. 
A Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson issued the following statement in Berlin today (24 September) on terrorist attacks targeting a mosque in Yemen’s capital Sana’a today: 
The Federal Government condemns the barbaric murder of worshippers at prayer in Sana’a. The attack during the Islamic Festival of Sacrifice, Eid al-Adha, is an attempt to further destabilise the situation in the country and to stir up hate and violence between population groups. 
At least 25 people were killed in attacks during the Islamic Festival of Sacrifice, Eid al-Adha, in the Yemeni capital Sana’a. 
Terrorist attack on a mosque in Yemen 
All actors in Yemen and the wider region have a responsibility to engage constructively in the mediation efforts spearheaded by UN Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed and to find a political solution to the conflict. 
The Yemeni population is suffering from the country’s catastrophic humanitarian situation. 
The attack was targeted against a mosque that seems to be mainly frequented by Shiite Houthi supporters. 
It will see the release of 100 people who were convicted in Egypt because of their work as journalists, for exercising their right of assembly or for alleged attacks against the security forces. 
I welcome this gesture and share the happiness of those released that they can celebrate this holiday with their friends and families. 
Activists continue to be arrested and held prisoner without trial. 
Statement by the Human Rights Commissioner on the amnesty in Egypt for the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Adha 
At the same time, many other young people remain imprisoned in Egypt for standing up for human rights, democracy and better living conditions. 
I encourage President al-Sisi and his Government to uphold the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in their entirety and to pursue a path of reconciliation in his country. 
On 24 September, Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, issued the following statement on the amnesty announced in Egypt on 23 September for the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Adha: 
The amnesty announced in Egypt on 23 September for the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Adha is a very important step in a positive direction. 
Foto: Steinmeier with Fabius and Hammond (from right to left) 
Prior to his departure, he said the following: 
The European position prior to the UN General Assembly 
What we urgently need now is a joint initiative to ensure that Syria remains a united and secular state in the future.” 
Foto: Steinmeier speaking to the media 
Numerous talks will be held on this matter also on the fringes of the UN week. 
Progress must be made towards de-escalating the conflict 
With regard to the efforts being made to de-escalate the bloody conflict in Syria as part of a first step, Steinmeier emphasised prior to his departure that divergent interests may no longer stand in the way of joint action on the part of the international community. 
He also said the following: 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier discussed possible ways out of the crisis in Syria with his counterparts Fabius and Hammond and EU High Representative Mogherini on Thursday evening. 
Steinmeier travelled to Paris for the talks at the invitation of the French Foreign Minister. 
“After five years of civil war, 250,000 dead and 12 million refugees, we must now take decisive steps to enter into a political dialogue on the future of Syria.” 
Those attending the talks in Paris shared the view that the current situation calls for a proactive, joint approach and for pressure to be exerted at EU level on the important regional and international actors. 
Moreover, they concluded, it is important to include all important regional actors in the process. 
Building on this, he continued, a way must now be found to initiate a political process and help de-escalate the conflict. 
“There will be no military solution to the internal conflicts in Syria. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin on 26 September on the agreement between Russia and Ukraine on energy supplies for the coming winter: 
The negotiations were hard work. 
I would like to thank especially Commissioner Šefčovič, without whose great dedication this result would not have been achieved. 
Steinmeier on Syria talks in Paris 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the agreement between Kyiv and Moscow on energy supplies 
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier discussed possible ways out of the crisis in Syria with his counterparts from France and the UK, Laurent Fabius and Philip Hammond, as well as with EU High Representative Federica Mogherini on Thursday evening (24 September). 
This was an important meeting for the Foreign Ministers and the EU High Representative for coordinating a common European stance on the further approach to the crisis in Syria, particularly in view of the upcoming General Assembly of the United Nations in New York next week. 
Among other things, the German Foreign Minister will be meeting his US colleague John Kerry and the Saudi Arabian Minister of Foreign Affairs Adel bin Ahmed Al-Jubeir in New York. 
For now, we have a workable solution for the coming winter at least that will help to avoid a humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and contribute to greater economic and social stability in Ukraine with financial support from Europe. 
I hope that no further difficulties will arise now in the efforts to implement this agreement. 
The fact that an agreement has been reached after long and difficult negotiations is good news, even though I would have preferred there to have been planning security for a longer period for all sides. 
Otherwise there is a risk that the conflict will slip back into a fresh phase of military and political escalation. 
At the meeting on Syria in Paris, there was consensus among the ministers on the necessity to actively support the UN process and UN Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura’s initiative to encourage dialogue among Syrians. 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier reiterated that the efforts made on the part of UN Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura constituted “excellent preparatory work”. 
But we cannot do it alone. 
“The world is mobile; the world is online” 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Thorsten Dirks, President of the German Association for Information Technology, Telecommunications and New Media e.V. (Bitkom), opened the Business Forum on information and communications technology at the Federal Foreign Office. 
I expect, also with a view to the Normandy format summit this coming Friday, the constructive spirit that led to this agreement to prevail once again in overcoming the crisis in eastern Ukraine and in the implementation of the Minsk agreements. 
Official visit to the USA 
Federal President Joachim Gauck and Daniela Schadt will be travelling to the United States of America for an official visit from 5 to 8 October. 
In addition to further political talks, the Federal President will also attend celebrations to mark the Day of German Unity at the Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany. 
Its German acronym is AWTIKT, its full title in English the Business Forum on Digital Innovation, IT and Communications Technology – 
Federal President Gauck will give a speech at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia and meet US President Barack Obama at the White House in Washington. 
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Bitkom President Thorsten Dirks jointly opened the event at the Federal Foreign Office on Friday (25 September). 
Representatives of companies and the Government were there to discuss the promotion of foreign trade and investment in light of digitisation and Industry 4.0. 
Steinmeier and Dirks 
In his opening speech, Foreign Minister Steinmeier talked about global involvement, astonishing digital developments in Africa and new forms of interconnection. 
He said that, as one of the most-connected countries in the world, Germany was particularly affected by digital developments. 
This, Steinmeier suggested, was why it was particularly important to have this year’s Business Forum dedicated to digital innovation, IT and communications technology, in cooperation with the German IT association Bitkom. 
He also pointed out that Germany’s model of prosperity depended on its ability to innovate, 
adding that foreign trade was generating powerful impetus in the digital sector too. 
Political input and digital innovation 
Steinmeier said he had been preparing the Federal Foreign Office and its 220 missions abroad for this challenge over the last two years to ensure they were as ready as possible to provide the right political input around the world. 
The 2014 and 2015 Ambassadors Conferences both had focuses relating to Industry 4.0 and digital developments. 
Steinmeier speaking at the start of the Forum 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier also touched on digital developments in Africa, 
saying that they presented major opportunities for German companies since, 
He emphasised the importance of this in relation to foreign policy, in terms of ensuring that economic growth goes hand in hand with broad social participation to allow African countries to enjoy as much stability as possible. 
The internet is a global commodity 
On the subject of access to information and networks, Steinmeier underlined Germany’s advocacy for an open and safe internet. 
Germany had joined Brazil to sponsor a resolution in the United Nations General Assembly, he said, because 
“We’re working for a free, open, safe and stable cyberspace. 
We’ll only be able to counteract those who do not view this matter with the same sensitivity if we act not as Germany alone but together with our European partners.” 
Afterwards, the participants engaged in dialogue in four workshops.